---
layout: post
title: "The Upcoming v1.0.0"
section: Blog
date: 2021-06-25T14:00:00
author: Eric Garver
category: Release
---

## Introduction and Motivations
Firewalld is about to have its first major version bump. This signifies that
there are non-compatible (breaking) changes being introduced. There are many
motivations for these changes. Each of which will be outlined in this post.

Many of these changes are about strengthening the `zone` concept in firewalld.
There were many cases were zones almost, but not quite behaved as expected.
The end result is that features enabled in a `zone` now apply almost
exclusively to traffic that is destined to the host running firewalld. For
anything else, e.g. forward filtering, a
[policy](https://firewalld.org/2020/09/policy-objects-introduction) should be
used.

## Dropped python2 support
Python2 is no longer supported. This support has been dropped everywhere:
source code, documentation, build, CI, packaging, etc. Python2 went
[EOL](https://www.python.org/doc/sunset-python-2/) as of January 1, 2020.

Dropping python2 allows us to take advantage of some python3 only features:

- [static type checking](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/730)
  (PEP 484) via mypy
- IP address
  [normalization](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/commit/e4dc44fcfd214b27c718eb4d99d3b137495b9626)
- preserve user
  [comments](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1563629) in
  configuration files

Most distributions were already building firewalld for use with python3.

## Reduced dependencies
These are the new set of dependencies:

- ebtables (optional)
- ipset (optional)
- iptables (optional)
- linux >= 5.3
- python3-dbus
- python3-gobject
- python3-nftables >= 0.9.4

Note that ebtables, ipset, and iptables are now _optional_. firewalld builds
and runs without their existence. If iptables is not present then the iptables
backend and direct interface will not be usable.

Additionally, the following dependencies have been _removed_:

- [python-decorator](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/pull/778)
- [python-slip](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/pull/793)

## Intra-zone forwarding by default
[Intra-zone forwarding](https://firewalld.org/2020/04/intra-zone-forwarding)
has been around since v0.9.0. However, it was disabled by default. In v1.0.0
it will be enabled by default for all shipped and newly created zones. This
includes zones: `public`, `block`, `trusted`, `internal`, etc.

This change aligns firewalld with one of the axioms of zone based firewalls.
That is, the zone defines the trust level and packets can freely move between
interfaces and sources with in the same zone.

This feature can be disabled on a per zone basis.

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --zone public --remove-forward
```

## NAT rules moved to inet family
Prior to v1.0.0, firewalld had to duplicate NAT rules in both the `ip` and
`ip6` families. Enabled by a bump in the minimal Linux requirement, 5.3+,
these have been combined into the [inet
family](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/commit/9d9a1a88b53ade7d0358f0f43200a08300c8d887).
There is no longer rule duplication.

This is very significant for ipsets. Prior to this change each ipset and ipset
entry had to be duplicated three times. Now there is a single copy. This
improves both rule application and execution times.

Note: This change only affects the nftables backend. The iptables backend
continues to have rule duplication, but does not have set duplication.

## Default target is now similar to reject
In the past users have been
[confused](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/590) about the
differences between `default` and `reject` values for the `--set-target` zone
option. This option defines a catch-all rule for packets at the end of the
zone's rule set. `default` was subtly different and caused all kinds of
[unexpected](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/258)
[behavior](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/441) like [zone
drifting](https://firewalld.org/2020/01/allowzonedrifting). It also caused
some zones to be unexpectedly [publicly
accessible](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/177).

Now `default` is identical to `reject` with one caveat: `default` allows ICMP
packets.

If you desire the old behavior in which the `trusted` zone is publicly
accessible it can be reintroduced via policies.

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy allowForward
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy allowForward --set-target ACCEPT
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy allowForward --add-ingress-zone public
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy allowForward --add-egress-zone trusted
# firewall-cmd --reload
```

See the commit,
[f2896e43](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/commit/f2896e43c3a548a299f87675a01e1a421b8897b8),
for further details.

## Policies with positive priority values
Prior to v1.0.0, policies with a positive priority value would apply if and
only if the relevant zones used a `--set-target` of `default`. With the above
change of "Default target is now similar to reject" these policies are no
longer reachable due to the zone's chains being terminal. Rule execution no
longer returns to the top-level chains, e.g. `forward`.

As such, policies with a positive value have been moved. They now execute
immediately before a zone's `--set-target` catch-all rule. Or said
differently, they are the last thing before the catch-all `drop`, `reject`, or
`accept` rule.

This also has the benefit that policies with a positive priority value are
effective for zones with a `--set-target` of `drop`, `reject`, or `accept`.
Prior to v1.0.0 they were not.

## ICMP blocks and block inversion only apply to input, not forward
ICMP blocks and ICMP block inversion were a bit odd in that they applied to
traffic destined to the host (input) and to any other zone (forward). This is
violation of zone concepts. Features added the zone should affect the zone and
only the zone. It should not allow packets to propagate to other zones.

Now the following behavior applies:

- [ICMP blocks only block ICMP packets destined to the
  host](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/commit/5f6e704531cf17a74927fcc494653f7a67bcd0f8)
- [ICMP block inversion only applies to packet destined to the
  host](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/commit/fcd95118b2d5e7e231262ec0dbc00f5b8badadf8)

ICMP blocks can be applied to forward traffic by using a policy.

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy blockICMP
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockICMP --add-ingress-zone public
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockICMP --add-egress-zone internal
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockICMP --add-icmp-block echo-request
# firewall-cmd --reload
```

ICMP block inversion can be simulated for forward traffic with a policy as well.

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy blockInversion
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockInversion --add-ingress-zone public
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockInversion --add-egress-zone internal
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockInversion --add-rich-rule='rule priority=100 icmp-type echo-request allow'
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy blockInversion --add-rich-rule='rule priority=32000 protocol value=icmp drop'
# firewall-cmd --reload
```

## tftp-client service has been removed
Firewalld has support for connection tracker helpers. Helpers are designed to
handle protocols that may, as part of the protocol, result in traffic on ports
different than the original flow of traffic. Without helpers this traffic
would look like a completely new and independent flow of traffic. A canonical
example of this is TFTP.

Unfortunately the `tftp-client` service never actually worked due to the
connection tracker helper assignment occurring in the wrong place. The
solution is to use the non-client service definition in combination with a
policy for outbound traffic. Then the outbound filtering will assign the
connection tracker helper and TFTP will work as expected.

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy hostTftpTraffic
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy hostTftpTraffic --add-ingress-zone HOST
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy hostTftpTraffic --add-egress-zone ANY
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy hostTftpTraffic --add-service tftp
# firewall-cmd --reload
```

Due to the fact that it never worked and can never work, the `tftp-client`
service has been removed. The above should be used instead.

## iptables backend is deprecated
Firewalld has had nftables support since v0.6.0. nftables is the actively
developed Linux firewall implementation. iptables is stable, but does not
receive new features. For this reason the iptables backend has been marked
deprecated.

Don't fret. Deprecation is not removal. iptables support won't be removed for
a long time. It just means the iptables backend is not the primary focus.

## Direct interface is deprecated
[Policy objects](https://firewalld.org/2020/09/policy-objects-introduction)
have largely made the direct interface obsolete. The direct interface was
mainly used because firewalld lacked forward and output filtering. Since
v0.9.0 firewalld has native support for those using a familiar interface. As
such the direct interface has limited usefulness.

If the firewalld is lacking features that force you to use the direct
interface then please file an
[issue](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues). Many things can be
added with minimal effort via [rich
rules](https://firewalld.org/documentation/man-pages/firewalld.richlanguage.html).

Don't fret. Deprecation is not removal. The direct interface will not be
removed for a long time. It just means its use is discouraged because in
most cases policy objects are a better choice.

## CleanupModulesOnExit defaults to no
A new configuration option `CleanupModulesOnExit` was introduced to avoid
unloading kernel modules when firewalld shuts down. This was done to avoid
[issues](https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld/issues/533) caused by the
module [unloading](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1520532).

Because `CleanupModulesOnExit` defaults to `no` it is considered a breaking
change. To get the old behavior it can be set to `yes`.

## The Exceptions
In the introduction it was mentioned that many of these changes were
strengthening the zone concept in firewalld. This section is about the
exceptions to the effort. These are are largely in order to maintain
compatibility with long standing expectations of other software that
integrates with firewalld. For example, libvirt and podman.

With the exception of the following all features added to a zone apply to
traffic destined to the host (input).

- `--set-target` value `accept` allows forwarding to other zones
    - zones like `trusted` will allow traffic to be forwarded to other zones
    - libvirt and podman rely upon this to give virtual machines and
      containers access to the internet
- `forward-port`
    - may affect traffic that ingresses a given zone, but is destined for a
      machine in a different zone. That is, traffic that would be forwarded.
    - forward ports are a type of DNAT. They occur in the NAT table during
      prerouting. At this point in packet processing it's undetermined if the
      packet is destined to the host or any other zone. As such the DNAT
      action may apply to both types of traffic.
- `masquerade`
    - affects traffic egressing a given zone
    - this is the only feature that when added to a zone applies to the
      traffic _leaving_ via the zone
- rich rule `mark` and `tcp-mss-clamp` actions
    - similar to forward ports these occur on zone ingress and apply to
      traffic destined to the host or any other zone.

It's suggested that new configurations use policies to make use of these
features. Using a policy makes it explicit to what kind of traffic the feature
is applied.

For example:

```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy pppTcpClamp
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy pppTcpClamp --add-ingress-zone internal
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy pppTcpClamp --add-egress-zone external
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy pppTcpClamp --add-rich-rule='rule tcp-mss-clamp'
# firewall-cmd --reload
```

## Conclusion
The firewalld developers are confident that the above changes are necessary to
improve the predictability and reliability of firewalld. None of the breaking
changes were made lightly. Many are years in the making.
